Hi friends
In this video we are going to learn how to
remove an element from a particular position in an array
So consider an array with 5 indices from 0 to 4 and
each
Index is currently holding a fruit a watermelon a strawberry
a mango a banana and a goa
Suppose we want to remove mango first
We want to find mango in the array
once it is found remove it now
This position is free now so shift banana One position left
to index two now
index three is free
So shift goa one position left to index three
and index four is free now And we don't have a
fruit for this location so we don't need it anymore
So that is how it is done
Now see this array here with five elements and indices
from 0 to 4
Suppose we want to delete element five
So initially we don't know where five is located so
first
We need to find five in the array
So we'll start searching from first position
We will compare one with five
It is not the same
So we move further to right now
Compare 20 and five again it is not the
same
So compare The next element so five is found at
index two so remove the element and index two becomes
free
So shift 78 to index two so index three is
free now so shift 30 to index three So index four
is no more needed
So it is deleted now let us discuss the
code to implement this again
We have an array of size equal to five and
indices from 0 to 4
Now we want to remove element five so first we
need to find where
five is resided
So it is at index two once the location of
element to be deleted is found it is stored in variable
index
So here index equal to two the for loop will
shift the elements to the left removing the value at
index
Now let us see how the code works first i equal
to index
That is from where we want to remove the element
Here i equal to two index equal to two it checks if
two is less than four the condition is true
So array of three which is 78
is moved to index two replacing 5. Now incrementing i becomes
three now checks If three is less than four
The condition is true so array of four which is
30 is moved to index three
Now incrementing i becomes four now it checks if four
is less than four condition is false
So control comes out of for loop and executes size
minus minus which will delete the last location of the array
So that's it
Now let us discuss about the time complexities
The best case will be when the element to be
removed is at the last position
Then we don't need the for loop to shift any
elements
We only need to reduce the array size so
that the last location where our element
is will be removed so the best case time complexity
is order of one
The worst case will be when the element to be
removed is at the first position
Then we need the for loop to shift all the
elements to the left if you have five elements and
if the first element is to be removed then the
for loop will have four iterations to shift 2nd 3rd
4th and fifth elements to the left
So generally if you have n elements you need n
minus one iterations and the worst case time complexity will
be order of n-1 which is polynomially order of n